The Indus River Basin is the largest river basin of Pakistan, stretching from the Northern part of Pakistan with an outlet in the Arabian sea. It includes reservoirs, barrages, and canals, which are mainly responsible for the irrigation water supply, hydropower generation, flood control, potable water needs and more. The current management practices for IRB had substantially aided Pakistan in its agricultural and industrial growth. But with the passage of time, ageing infrastructure, existing management practices coupled with the external pressures like population, inflow and demand variation had resulted in the lower performance of the system. The center, understanding the future water-related challenges, has taken an initiative to address the magnitude of the problems in context with providing management solutions for IRB.
The study undertook by USPCAS-W was threefold, creating a database for Upper and Lower Indus Basin, providing management solutions for the structures located in the Upper Indus Basin to improve the performance of the system, and assessment of water accord for the Lower Indus Basin for the current and proposed agricultural practices (Figure-1). The first aspect of the study was vital, based on which the other areas of the research were conceptualized. The rationale behind this was the prior understanding of the fact that either the data was unavailable for the IRB or there was a deficiency of a concrete system to gather and transfer the data among different organizations and institutes. The center was able to create a detailed and credible database for the IRB. With the creation of the database, an integrated water management model was created for the Upper Indus Basin (UIB), which consisted of three main structures namely, Tarbela, Mangla and Chashma dam and reservoir. The WEAP model was used to evaluate the performance of the structures under the current and existing operations. The evaluation of the reservoir management under the current operations opened the pathways to identify the limitations of existing practices and explore different management solutions to improve the performance in terms of Reliability, Resilience, and Vulnerability (RRV) of the system, which was otherwise not explored because of the lack of much-needed research in this context. The proposed management procedures and strategies were constantly shared by Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA), Federal Flood Commission (FFC) and Indus River System Authority (IRSA) for their valuable input. With multiple and essentially diverse management solutions available, efforts were made to consider the ones which were cost effective and aligned with the current or future development plans. The extensive research done on the three main reservoirs had shown different practical paths, which once adapted would increase the performance of the overall system. The management of the reservoirs was closely amalgamated with the water distribution schemes among the different provinces, especially between Punjab and Sindh. Historically, Punjab and Sindh had differences on water sharing of the Indus River, which exacerbated during the low flow years. Therefore, in 1991, Indus Water distribution agreement known as Water Apportionment Accord (WAA) was signed among all the provinces. Sindh, being the lower riparian province with a large fraction of the economy dependent on the flow released from the Punjab province, had been the focus area of the research. The center had extensively investigated the performance of the three barrages (Guddu, Sukkur and kotri) in terms of RRV to meet the demands of the command area under the current accord for the historical (1991-2015) and future period (2015-2050) under existing and proposed agricultural practices. 
